<div class="section">

h1. lib.plist

| *File Format* | "XML Property List":http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd |

This file contains arbitrary data for the font. It is a place to store application specific, user specific or otherwise arbitrary data. This file is optional. If it is not defined in the UFO, there is no lib data.

h2. Specification

The property list data consists of a dictionary at the top level. In order to prevent conflicts in the lib, keys in the top level should follow a reverse domain naming convention (see below). It is recommended that the data stored as a value be as shallow as possible.

h4. Reverse Domain Naming Convention

Keys in the lib should follow a reverse domain naming convention. To make your unique key, reverse your Internet domain. For example, if your Internet domain is _robofab.com_, your reverse domain name would be _com.robofab_. When creating a key for storing data in the lib, use this reverse domain at the beginning of your key. For example to store settings for a script, if your Internet domain is _robofab.com_ and your script is called _AccentBuilder_, an appropriate key would be _com.robofab.AccentBuilder_.


h3. Example

<pre class="prettyprint">
&lt;?xml version=&quot;1.0&quot; encoding=&quot;UTF-8&quot;?&gt;
&lt;!DOCTYPE plist PUBLIC &quot;-//Apple Computer//DTD PLIST 1.0//EN&quot;
&quot;http://www.apple.com/DTDs/PropertyList-1.0.dtd&quot;&gt;
&lt;plist version=&quot;1.0&quot;&gt;
&lt;dict&gt;
  &lt;key&gt;org.robofab.scripts.SomeData&lt;/key&gt;
  &lt;string&gt;Hello World.&lt;/string&gt;
&lt;/dict&gt;
&lt;/plist&gt;
</pre>

</div>